---
inmenu: 0
layout: page
title: Biography
permalink: /rannalabio/
---
## Bruce Rannala
I am a first generation university graduate and participate in the [#firstgen](http://firstgen.ucdavis.edu/) organization which aims to provide support and inspiration to
first generation college students attending UC Davis. Undoubtedly, I have faced fewer obstacles than many first-generation students. However, I hope that some aspects of my 
personal biography will speak to some of you and encourage you to continue pursuing your academic goals despite the obstacles. I will focus more on the practical aspects of attending university with little or no family financial support, which was my situation. In many cases, first generation students may not have the financial support from their families that others do and finances can be a big obstacle.   

# Parents
My father Ivar Rannala emigrated to Canada with his widowed mother (Ines) and brother in the 1950s. They arrived by ship 
at [Pier 21](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pier_21) in Halifax (from Sweden) and travelled across 
Canada by train to Vancouver. They were Estonian refugees who had fled Estonia in 1944 when it was occupied by the USSR. They spent several years in a refugee camp in Sweden
before emigrating to Canada. Ines' sister Berta was already living in Canada and sponsored her immigration application. Berta emigrated from Finland to British Columbia with her husband in the 1920s. He
had fought with the Reds during the Finnish Civil War and was under threat of reprisals after the Whites' victory. It is perhaps ironical that Ines, who was fleeing Soviet communism, was sponsored
by Berta who had come to Canada as a communist fleeing fascism.

I never met my paternal grandfather Aleksander. He was accused of socialist activities and executed in the summer 1941 by an 
Estonian paramilitary group allied with the Nazi forces. That period of Estonian history, when [Nazi Germany invaded Estonia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/German_occupation_of_Estonia_during_World_War_II)
pushing out the [occupying Soviet forces](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Occupation_of_the_Baltic_states), is often called the "holocaust by bullets.'' 
That summer, thousands of Estonians were executed including virtually all the Jews who had remained in 
Estonia rather than leaving with the departing Soviet forces. 
My father was 7 years old when his father died. 
Aleksander had been a rum-runner in the coastal village of [Viinistu](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viinistu) where my father grew up. 
During the [1920s prohibition period](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prohibition#Nordic_countries) he smuggling Estonian vodka by sea to Finland.
As one of the so-called "Vodka Kings," Alexander did well enough for he and Ines to have their family farm in Viinistu while spending winters
in the capital Tallin where my uncles attended secondary school at a French lycee. 
He met his wife-to-be Ines through her brothers who were business associates on the Finnish side. 

Ines settled in East Vancouver where she worked as a seamstress in a textile factory. She operated a boarding house as well before
buying a farmhouse with acreage and moving to the then-rural community of Port Coquitlam.
My father Ivar was 15 when the family came to Canada. He had started school while a refugee in Sweden but began skipping classes and then dropped out because
of bullying the Swedish boys inflicted on the Estonians. He had little formal education beyond elementary school when he arrived in Canada and he spoke no English. He once told me that
he learned English by reading books with the help of a dictionary. One consequence is that many of his pronunciations are incorrect and he passed these on to me by reading out loud
to me when I was a child.
At least that is the excuse that I use. 

At 16, my father Ivar began working as a crew hand (eventually becoming a quartermaster) on [Union Steamships](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Union_Steamship_Company_of_British_Columbia) 
delivering passengers and freight to 
the logging and mining camps of British Columbia. In his mid-twenties he completed a course as a radio technician and eventually specialized in selling and servicing radio equipment used by the logging industry.
My father married my mother Rayna at about this time. My maternal grandfather had emigrated to B.C. from Saskatchewan during the great depression. After earning a modest income as a gold miner working
claims on the Fraser River, he became a Millwright at the pulp and paper mill in Gibsons, B.C. My maternal grandmother developed
multiple sclerosis and my mother (being the eldest of 6 children) had to take on many of the domestic responsibilities at home; as a partial consequence she left school in grade 11.

# Childhood and adolescence  
I was born in New Westminster, British Columbia in 1964. Shortly thereafter my family moved to the small isolated logging community of [Port McNeill](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Port_McNeill) on Northern Vancouver Island. 
I attended school in Port McNeill. The schools at that time were not very good but we did have several excellent and dedicated teachers especially at the elementary level. I was not particularly studious,
however, and spent a lot of my time working after school. I was precocious and by age 11 had a job assembling toy exhibits at a department store. I switched to pumping gas and repairing tires at the
local Shell station when I was 12 and worked weekends entirely on my own which seems unthinkable now. I cannot remember ever having done homework as a child. I bought a 
motorcycle and, as was usual in that town, rode it unlicensed on the logging roads. I was involved in a motorcycle accident with a crew bus when I was 15 and sustained a 
compound fracture of both bones in my lower left leg. The injury was very serious and my parents and I were asked to choose between an amputation or a long and difficult surgery
that might not be successful. We chose surgery and I missed most of that school year as I was in and out of the hospital in Vancouver for the surgeries which were ultimately successful. 

# Early adulthood
I graduated from North Island Secondary School ([NISS](https://northislandsecondary.edublogs.org/)) in 1982. My graduating class included about 80 students, fewer than a dozen of whom went on to college.
In my senior years at NISS I enrolled in a pre-apprenticeship program in heavy-duty mechanics. I completed a work-study program in HD mechanics with a local logging company and 
successfully passed the Provincial pre-apprenticeship certification exam. Among other things, I know how to replace a worn track on a [Caterpillar D8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Caterpillar_D8) 
bulldozer and can operate a [Caterpillar
966](https://www.cat.com/en_IN/products/new/equipment/wheel-loaders/medium-wheel-loaders/1000023498.html) articulated frame loader. This knowledge has proven useful when I need to service the old diesel engine on my sailboat.  Like many kids I was anxious to leave my small town and move to the nearest large city, which happened to be Vancouver. I somehow discovered that if I completed
my grade 12 English course by correspondence I could leave town 6 months before graduation, which is what I did. This was not the wisest decision I have made as I was late finishing my final English assignment;
had it not been for the efforts of my correspondence instructor to get the results to NISS in time, I would not have been able to graduate.

When I graduated from high school in 1982 the Canadian economy was in [deep recession](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Early_1980s_recession). It was the era of [Reaganomics](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reaganomics~) and a period of stagflation with the unemployment rate in Canada hitting 12%. I had worked part-time as a baker during high school and continued full-time after I
graduated. The following year I took a position as a logger ([chokerman](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/chokerman)) for Kilpala Logging and worked "in the bush" for a year. It was a union job ([IWA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/International_Woodworkers_of_America)) so the wages were good and I managed to save some money which was helpful when I eventually went to university. In retrospect, I feel very fortunate to have survived the dangerous work environment of the "North Island" in those
years to pursue what has essentially been a second life in academia. Even during high school I lost many friends to logging and commercial fishing accidents.
   
# Undergrad at UBC
I was 21 years old when I started my first year of studies at the University of British Columbia. Since I did not have the formal pre-requisites to be admitted, I had
initially planned to attend college first and then transfer in third year. However, my girlfriend at the time had a recent degree from UBC and suggested that I apply 
directly to UBC as a mature student. This may have been somewhat self-interest on her part as it meant we would be living closer to one another. 
I applied as a mature student, wrote an entrance exam and was admitted. 
In retrospect, the advice was good as it allowed me a greater opportunity to get
to know my professors during my first two years which in turn allowed me to get involved in research projects as an senior undergraduate. I was initially pre-med. I don't remember my motivations except that I was
probably idealistic and felt drawn to a humanitarian profession. What I do remember is that I wanted to be in a position that did not require me to ask my clients to pay for my services.
Obviously that greatly restricted the possibilities. To be perfectly honest, I was completely unaware at that point that professors existed whose sole job was teaching and research. 

I had a formative job experience the summer after my first year at university that changed my career goals. My father had worked as a volunteer paramedic for the B.C. Provincial Ambulance Service for many years.
The paramedics were trained through an intensive 2 week course called the Industrial First Aid Course and once they had this training they were eligible to serve as an ambulance attendant in a rural community. I took the
training program in Vancouver during the summer of 1986 and spent that summer on call for the ambulance service in Port McNeill. Although I was supposed to serve with an experienced paramedic on my
first few calls the only persons to show up for my first call were myself and a driver.  I had to handle the call on my own; the victim had a skull fracture and eventually had to be flown to Vancouver for neurosurgery.
That summer was an intensive education in trauma medicine. I would be on 24 hour call several days a week, carrying a pager. When the pager went off I had to rush down to the fire station to go out with the ambulance.
The pager always seemed to go off when I was in the shower. By the end of the summer I had lost my enthusiasm for medical school but developed a great respect for emergency medical workers.

During my third and fourth years at UBC I discovered the topics that have been the main subjects of research throughout my career. The courses that I took in Biometry and Population Genetics, both taught by Professor Conrad Werhahn revealed a new branch of biology that was highly mathematical and fascinated me. In addition, I took a parasitology course taught by Professor Daniel Brooks that was very focused on phylogenetics and evolution. I became very interested in phylogenetic analysis and started working with Dr. Brooks studying host-parasite coevolution and conducted a small study using electrophoresis to compare host and parasite genetic distances as an honours thesis project. Dr. Brooks moved to a position at the University of Toronto during my fourth year at UBC and another parasitologist, Prof. Martin Adamson, generously took over as my advisor during my final year.  I graduated first-class honours in Zoology from UBC in 1989.

# Financing my undergraduate degree
I supported myself during my undergrad by a combination of savings, B.C. Provincial Scholarships (awarded based on overall academic standing, introduced by the B.C. government in the 1980s and worth several thousand dollars), summer work managing a garden center, and student loans. Fortunately, tuition and housing costs at UBC in the 1980s were relatively low and I completed my degree with about $16,000 CAD in student loan debts which is very little by today's standards. Nonetheless, I could not afford to make payments on my student loan while doing postdoctoral studies at UC Berkeley in the mid-1990s on my meager NSERC postdoctoral salary and was forced into default (a postdoc position does not qualify for deferred interest and payments as a degree program does). I was then hounded by American collection agencies hired by the Canadian government for several years until I landed a faculty position. At that point I obtained a line of credit and paid the loan off in full (including 9% compounded interest applied over several years that had increased the principal by about 50%). I was very fortunate to have obtained a position that allowed me to do this. 

There were many things wrong with the Canadian student loan program (CLSP) at that time. The banks financing the loans were eager to have students default as this meant a full payback from the government which guaranteed the loans. The banks effectively had guaranteed interest payments from the Canadian government while the student was studying -- zero risk -- and then once the student was finished and became a financial risk and a servicing cost a default would get the loan off the books.  There was little or no incentive for banks to try to assist students in financial trouble. Once in default the collection agencies demanded payment of the full amount plus interest and in my experience this was non-negotiable. Most newly graduated students would have no way out in such a situation.  The bank that I dealt with CIBC was one of the worst offenders. 

Some background: "From 1964 to 1995, the CSLP made available financial assistance by way of a 100% government guarantee for student loans made by private financial institutions. The guarantee scheme had drawbacks, however. It was costly for government, created little incentive for financial institutions to seek repayment, and did not provide suitable levels of service to borrowers.(1)" For further details [see](https://lop.parl.ca/content/lop/researchpublications/prb0126-e.htm).  The repayment situation is [improving now](https://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2016/10/31/student-loan-canada-debt-repayment-assistance_n_12735944.html) in Canada and since 1995 Canadian banks have had to assume more of the financial risk for student loans. I am not ashamed of having temporarily defaulted on my student loan, it was necessary for me to complete my education and successfully obtain an academic  job. Ultimately I paid it back with interest. If you find yourself in similar circumstances my advice is don't feel ashamed, focus on the bigger picture and recognize that bankers do not have the moral high ground when it comes to student debt.  


# Graduate studies
Prof. Brooks, now at the University of Toronto, encouraged me to apply to a M.Sc. program there. I applied and was accepted. I purchased a 1968 Datsun pickup for $400 filled it with essential possessions and drove with my spouse from Vancouver to Toronto to begin graduate school in the fall of 1989. I received a scholarship from the province of Ontario and then in my second year an NSERC post-graduate scholarship. These sources of funding plus work as a teaching assistant and income my spouse earned working as an administrator for the Toronto Quakers (Society of Friends) allowed us to survive financially (especially once we were able to enter the graduate student housing complex after a year on a waiting list). I continued my electrophoresis studies of frogs and trematode parasites in Toronto working in Professor Robert Murphy's lab at the Royal Ontario Museum. I also contacted Prof. Brian Golding, one of Canada's most famous theoretical population geneticists, while in Toronto, asking him to mentor me in the population genetics aspects of my project. Professor Golding was an Assistant Professor at York University at that time and he kindly agreed to serve on my Masters thesis committee.   I began considering PhD programs during this time and applied to UC Davis, UC Berkeley, Harvard Medical School and Yale University. I also applied for an NSERC postgraduate scholarship approved for study abroad which was very competitive. Fortunately I was awarded the NSERC scholarship (I could not have afforded graduate school without it) and I was offered admission at Yale and Harvard but rejected at the UC schools (we have high standards at UC!). I successfully defended my Masters thesis at U of T in the Spring of 1991. 

I accepted the offer at Yale and drove the Datsun to New Haven in the fall of 1991 to begin my PhD studies. Because my NSERC scholarship was a fixed amount in Canadian dollars I was now at the mercy of the exchange rates. In 1991 the exchange rate was between 1.12 and 1.16, but then climbed to 1.275 in 1992, 1.325 in 1993 and 1.4 in 1994. My support was shrinking year by year. Initially, I was on an F1 visa and my spouse had an F2 which did not allow her to work so the NSERC and my TAs were our only income. In my third year I was able to switch to a J1 visa and my spouse was then a J2 and able to get an employment authorization document. My spouse was able to obtain part-time employment in the Peabody Museum and then full-time employment as a conservation technician at the Yale Center for British Art. Initially we just managed financially but things improved once my partner had a full-time job. My initial PhD supervisor at Yale was Prof. Charles Brown who is a behavioral ecologist and ornithologist. The plan was to study host-parasite population genetics using the cliff swallow and swallow bug host-parasite system that Prof. Brown was studying at that time. I spent several summers (1991-1994) doing field work at the Cedar Point Field Station in Ogallala, Nebraska and about half of my PhD thesis was a demographic study of swallow bugs. The population genetic component was less successful because genetic techniques for DNA-based studies of non-model organism insects were largely unavailable at that time. After several unsuccessful attempts to amplify DNA from the bugs using primers from other insects I abandoned the genetic analysis. Prof. Jeff Powell at Yale hosted me in his lab for this work and he and his postdocs and students were very generous in providing assistance but it was a hopeless effort. 

My PhD research was entirely self-supported. I obtained small grants from the Animal Behavior Society, The Chapman Fund of the American Museum of Natural History, and Sigma Xi which were critical in funding my field work. I also received a more substantial grant from the National Geographical Society and a Dissertation Improvement Grant from the NSF. The exposure to Prof. Brown's field studies generated an interest in mark-recapture methods and I began working on stochastic models for studying within- and between-season migration rates among breeding colonies by cliff swallows. I contacted Prof. John Hartigan in the Statistics Department at Yale to ask his advice on the mark-recapture project and he generously agreed to advise me. This turned into a long-term mentorship that included studies of new population genetics models as well. Prof. Hartigan's mentorship was critical in my shift to statistical genetics, he became a member of my thesis committee and met with me weekly. I frequently audited courses in Statistics and got to know many of the faculty. Shortly after my second year at Yale, Prof. Brown left to take a position at the University of Tulsa. At that point about half my research was focused on developing new statistical models of population genetic structure that extend the Wright Island Model to populations that experience size fluctuations and extinctions. Prof. Gunter Wagner, a population geneticist at Yale agreed to take over as my formal PhD advisor and I continued to work primarily with Prof. Hartigan. I completed and defended my PhD thesis in the Spring of 1995. I gave the Datsun to the custodian of our housing complex in New Haven and drove a uhaul to California to begin a postdoc in Prof. Monty Slatkin's lab at UC Berkeley.

# Postdoctoral studies
Shortly before I finished my PhD I obtained an NSERC Postdoctoral Fellowship which provided salary support for 2 years. This fellowship funded my first two years as a postdoc in Berkeley. An advantage of having my 
own support was that I was free to work on projects of my own choosing. A disadvantage was that the salary was in Canadian dollars and thus relatively low and the cost of living in Berkeley was high. Fortunately there were still rent controls in Berkeley at that time and I found an apartment on Telegraph Avenue that I could afford. Another disadvantage was that my postdoc did not provide health care coverage. My third year as a postdoc at UCB was supported by Prof. Slatkin's NIH grant and was relatively luxurious by comparison. The decision to join Prof. Slatkin's lab influenced my academic career greatly. An amazing group of postdocs and students happened to enter the lab at that time who were interested in phylogenetics and population genetics. I began several collaborations which have been long-term and highly productive. Most of us had our own funding so we often worked independently, or with one another. This is when I first began collaborating on developing Bayesian phylogenetic methods with Ziheng Yang, a collaboration that continues today.

# Faculty positions
I began applying for faculty positions during the last year of my PhD studies and was invited to interview for several positions during my first and second year at UCB. Many of us postdocs were applying to the
same posts and were directly competing with one another. In 1996 I was invited to interview for Lectureships at the University College London and the University of East Anglia. My spouse and I made our first trip to
Europe for those interviews. I was not offered either position but was reportedly the second pick for the UCL position (my collaborator Ziheng Yang received the offer and is still at UCL!). I was offered a position
at SUNY Stony Brook in Spring 1997 and accepted. The funding for the position was not available until fall 1998 so I remained at UCB as a postdoc for a third year. It was nice having the freedom of a postdoc for a
year without the worries of finding a position. I was able to obtain an adjunct Assistant Professor appointment during my final year as a postdoc and this allowed me to submit an NIH grant proposal. The grant was funded and so I was fortunate to have grant support already in place when I started my position at Stony Brook. NIH funding success rates were about twice as high then as they are now. 

After a short but enjoyable 
visiting Professorship in Paris funded by the Ecole Normale Superio (in the Spring of 1998) I moved to Stony Brook in Fall 1998. The salary at Stony Brook was only about 20% higher than my postdoc salary had been and
we lived for two years renting summer cottages for the winter months (or vacant condos) and commuting large distances over bumpy and congested Long Island roads in a 1980s Pontiac that I bought from a departing PhD student for $900. My teaching load was also quite high and I would stay up all night preparing lectures at least 2 to 3 days per week. I remember once walking out to my car at 4am. It was one of In particular, I took over teaching the Biometry course developed by Profs. Robert Sokal and Jim Rohlf, which was very demanding, developed a new undergraduate course in
human genetics and co-taught the graduate course in population genetics. 

There were many positive aspects to the Ecology and Evolution Department at USB.  The famous biometrician Prof. Robert Sokal was my faculty mentor at USB and I enjoyed having a weekly lunch meeting with him. I recruited my first two graduate students and hired a postdoc on my NIH grant. My partner became an editorial assistant for the Quarterly Review of Biology based at USB and enjoyed getting to know the talented evolutionary biologist George Williams who was a founding member of the QRB editorial board.
A faculty position is a lot like a marriage -- some work out other don't, neither partner is entirely to blame. After my first year at USB I knew things were not working for me and I began to consider other positions. I was working quite a bit on human population genetics at that time and applied for a position in the newly founded Department of Medical Genetics at the University of Alberta. My partner and I are both from British Columbia so we were also very interested in returning to western Canada. 

I was offered a position at U of A and moved to Edmonton during the summer of 2000. The position at U of A was about as different from USB as could be possible. It was in a medical school so there was no undergraduate teaching and very little teaching in general. Salary support was obtained by applying for competitive salary awards from the Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research (AHFMR) and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR).                 


