---
layout: post
title:  "Compile BA3 for Windows With MinGW"
date:   2018-03-27 16:53:42 -0700
categories: jekyll update
---

# Compiling BA3 for Windows 
I am not a Windows user, however plenty of BayesAss users are. For this reason I keep a recent
version of Windows on a dual-boot linux notebook where I can compile and test BA3 on the Windows OS.
Here I outline the procedure that I use to compile BA3 for Windows using a port of the gcc compiler
to Windows known as MinGW.
MinGW compiles the BA3 program to create an executable that runs under either a 32 or 64-bit Windows
operating system. These notes are very brief and intended mostly for my use so that I can remember
how to compile the program under Windows as I do this fairly infrequently and tend to forget.
However, even a user without prior programming experience should be able to follow the example code
and compile the program from source themselves.

# Why not cross-compile?
Personally, I would prefer to never have to use Windows. For one thing, every time I start up
the Windows OS it is normally 6 months to a year behind on updates and I spend hours downloading and
installing gigabytes of security patches and other updates. Ugh. The MinGW is available for linux
and in principle one can cross-compile program for Windows directly in linux and then test the binaries
using the Wine windows emulator. This is relatively easy when there are no external libraries --
a simple "hello world!" program for example. However, I encountered difficulties trying to
cross-compile BA3 because it uses the Gnu Scientific Library (gsl). A Windows binary of this
library has to be created first and then linked to the BA3 program when it is compiled, something
I could not manage so I gave up and moved on to the procedure described here which is to install the
MinGW compiler suite on the Windows machine and then compile the Windows executables. If you
have managed to cross-compile BA3 under linux I would love to hear the details -- email me.

# Preparing to compiling BA3
The first step in this procedure is to install the MinGW compiler package. There are currently two
separate distributions of MinGW. The [original MinGW project](http://www.mingw.org/) (circa 2005) which is a bit stale now,
and the [MinGW-W64](https://mingw-w64.org) project that was forked from MinGW in 2007. Here we will use a program
MSYS2 that implements a small unix shell for Windows and includes a package manager pacman that will allow
us to install the MinGW-W64 compilers and also the libraries needed for compiling BA3. There is a Windows binary of the gsl
library available through pacman which eliminates the need for compiling gsl ourselves. Download MSYS2 from
[www.msys2.org](http://www.msys2.org/). Be sure to download the correct executable "x86_64" for
a modern 64-bit or "i686" for an older 32-bit Windows OS.

After installing MSYS2 run the program and type the following command at the shell prompt
```
pacman -Syuu
```
then follow the prompts to update all the installed packages. Now we need to install three additional packages
to compile BA3
```
pacman -S mingw64/mingw-w64-x86_64-gsl mingw64/mingw-w64-x86_64-gcc msys/make
```
I have installed the 64-bit binaries. If you are compiling for 32-bit Windows replace
x86_64 with i686. Exit and restart the MSYS program. We are now ready to compile!

# Compiling BA3
Download the latest source code for BA3 from [github.com/brannala/BA3](https://github.com/brannala/BA3). Place the source code in a subdirectory of your home directory,
for example C:\Users\Bruce\BA3. Open MSYS and move to that directory
```
cd /c/Users/Bruce/BA3
```
Now edit the file named Makefile using a text editor. I prefer the command line text editor emacs which can be installed in MSYS2 with the commands
```
pacman -S mingw64/mingw-w64-x86_64-emacs
```
To use emacs to edit the Makefile type
```
emacs Makefile
```
Edit the contents of the Makefile to be:
```
INCLUDE = -Iinclude
CFLAGS = -O3
LDLIBS = -lgsl
CC = g++
all:
	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) src/main.cpp $(INCLUDE) $(LDLIBS) -o BA3_x64
```
Note that the space below all: must be a single tab. Save your changes
to the Makefile and type make. That should cause the program to compile
and produce a Windows executable file named BA3_x64.exe.

